# Chapter-8 Data Structure Tree


## Table of Contents

1. [Tree Introduction](#tree-introduction)

</br>

## Tree Introduction

Welcome back, it's time to learn another data structure. This is a big one, and
exciting one at that, because it's going to introduce a low more new topics,
especially when we get into our algorithms as well, they're called Trees,

</br>

![chapter-8-1.png](./images/chapter-8-1.png "Trees Introduction")
</br>

Trees are data structure that have what we call a hierarchical structure, as
opposed to something like linked list or arrays which are linear. Trees can have
zero or more child nodes.

You see, a Tree usually start with a _single_ **Root**  node, or a **Parent**
node, and every child of the Tree descends from this root node, so it's kind
like an inversed Tree like above; and every **Child** of a node descends from only
one Parent.

So you have a Parent child relationship that you see is, you need directional,
that is it's gone one way; and you also have **Leaf** nodes which are the very
end of a three data structure.

Finally, within a tree you can have things like **Subtrees**, such as the area
over here circled in red `3, 6, 7` from a Subtree.

Tree data structure are very important, because you work with them every day.
If we go t twitter.com or any website, for that matter and we open the developer
tools, if I go to the Elements tab, you see our web pages are created by
something called **DOM** (document object model), and this is a Tree data
structure. It's doesn't look like a tree that I just showed you, but the browser
is just making it look nice, but underneath it, we have `<head>` and `<body>`
that are children of the `<html>` tag; inside the  `<body>` we have all these
children, and inside these children we have more children and more children, and
they're all connected hierarchical to one another.

I'm sure everybody has tried to play chess online versus a computer; well,
a computer in a chess game at least back in the day before we had things like
machine learning, used a Tree data structure to make a decision. Should I make
this move?; or should I make that move?; and it would pick moves based on which
move had the better outcome. Facebook comment for example are a Tree data
structure, where I can comment on a friends photo, and their friend can comment
on my comment.

Family Trees can be represented in a Tree data structure; and for use engineers
and programmers, you might have heard of the [abstract syntax
Tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_syntax_tree), if I google abstract
syntax tree in an image tab, this is how program are and code is usually being
run. Usually we write code and then it gets broken down by the machine into this
abstract syntax tree, so that it understands what we wrote down.

The beauty of Trees is, that we **use the same principle as we did in linked
list**, that is we have Nodes, and these Nodes can contains any type of
information that we want, we can have user information, we can just have numbers
like we have in picture above, anything we want we can contain within a node.

</br>

![chapter-8-2.png](./images/chapter-8-2.png "Linked list Trees examples")
</br>

Now you might be thinking, this kind reminds me of a linked list and you'd be
right, linked list is technically a type of Tree, but with just one single path
and it's linear, there's only one way to go from top to bottom, versus what
we've seen before in a normal tree like (pic: chapter-8-1.png).

Now the thing to keep in mind here, there might be different than linked list,
is that a node can only point to a child as you can see all the arrow point
down. There's always one entry point, which is the Root, but nodes don't really
have to reference their parent.

Now, just like in real life, there are many types of Three data structures that
we can have. If you go to Wikipedia and you look for all the [Tree data
structures](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tree_data_structure), it's going to
well intimidate you, that's for sure, because look how many different types of
Threes we have.

Just like in real life how we have all these different types of Trees, there's
different types of Trees that we can have for a specific use case, but don't get
overwhelmed. In this course we're going to go over the main ones that get used,
I would say 90% of the time, and the ones that you're most likely going to
encounter during an interview, because at the end of the day, once you
understand what a Tree data structures like, how to create it, how to perhaps
use some actions on it, then all the other Trees that you saw are just minor
alterations to what we know.

I want to warn you back in the day, when I took a class on data structures,
these parts especially Trees, really really dragged on, and made me not
interested in data structures, because there's so many things you can talk about
when it comes to Trees. I'm going to try and keep engaged to the best of my
ability and try be an efficient, through this section; and show you the
important to know for an interview and to lay the foundation, not to teach you
every single Tree that is which is not going to benefit. With that in mind I'll
see you in next lecture.

**[â¬† back to top](#table-of-contents)**
</br>
</br>
