# Chapter-7 Data Structure Stacks and Queues

## Tables of Contents
1. [Stacks and Queues Introduction](#stacks-and-queues-introduction)

</br>

## Stacks and Queues Introduction

</br>

![chapter-7-1.png](./images/chapter-7-1.png "Stacks and Queues Introduction")
</br>

We're going to learn two data structures at the same time, stack and queues;
because they're very similar. They are both what we call **linear data
structures**. Linear data structures allow us to traverse, that is go through
data elements sequentially one by one, in which only one data element can be
directly reached. This become more clear to you as we talk more about stacks and
queues the next couple lecture.

The reason that these are very similar is that they can be **implemented in
similar ways**; and the **main different** is only how **items get removed**
from this data structure.

Unlike an array, in stacks and queues, there's **no random access operations**.
You mainly use stacks and queues to run command like **push**, **peak**,
**pop**. All of which deal exclusively with the element at the beginning or the
end of the data structure.

Now, after I said that, was you first thought? Does it kind of sound limiting,
that with stacks and queues we usually can access the first or the last element
in the data structure. Why would we ever want to use something like this?. This
is an important topic in Computer Science. You will see that we can build things
like stacks and queues which are using arrays or linked lists, except unlike
arrays and linked lists we have less methods or less actions that we can perform
on stacks and queues.

Sometimes it's good to have these higher level data structures that built on top
of lower like linked list and arrays to limit the operations you can do on them.
That's actually a benefit.

In Computer Science having this limited ability on a data structure is an
advantage, because you can control, that whoever uses this data structure,
performs only the right operations that are efficient. If you give somebody all
the tools in the world, it's a lot harder for them to operate, than  if you just
give them two or three, so that they know exactly what they need to do.

Let's talk about stacks and queues throughout the next couple lectures to really
understand how they work, and then finally code our own.

**[â¬† back to top](#table-of-contents)**
</br>
</br>

